senseFly, the world’s leading producer of mapping drones, announces Always On, a new worry-free service package designed to keep professional drone operators working and ensure business continuity. Businesses are increasingly professionalizing their drone operations, with UAV data acquisition developing in-line with this change, marking a move from using drones in pilot projects only to integrating the technology into companies’ business models and processes. To address the growing demand for turnkey solutions that come with professional grade service and support, senseFly has developed its Always On service package. Available as a bundle option alongside every new eBee Plus drone purchase, Always On provides operators with an advanced level of professional support and peace of mind. In the event of a drone hardware problem — whether the result of user error, a naturally occurring event or a technical issue — customers can simply contact their local senseFly representative to have their drone replaced for free within 48 hours, no questions asked*. “Helping clients by providing them with reliable and highly accurate mapping drones and exceptional professional grade service has always been at the core of what we do. Today we’re taking this support to the next level, enabling eBee Plus operators to virtually eliminate the issue of project disruption and, in turn, allowing them to better plan their workloads and meet their commitments, because business never stops,” explained Jean-Thomas Celette, chief sales and marketing officer at senseFly. The eBee Plus is a large coverage photogrammetric mapping system featuring RTK/PPK upgradeability, for survey -grade accuracy on demand. This platform has gained attention for mapping more square miles per flight than any drone in its weight class. In addition to 48-hour, no-questions-asked drone replacement, senseFly’s new Always On service package also extends the eBee Plus’s limited warranty from one to two years and includes free scheduled services, as well as free battery replacements. “As a professional drone service provider, we always ensure that we are prepared for any challenges we may encounter in the field. This means we supply our team with backup aircraft and spare parts to adequately support every mission,” said Josh Kornoff, senior director of drone engineering at Measure. “Always On will help us reduce the amount of capital we have invested in
backup equipment.” Always On is available for professional users in the United States and will be supported by senseFly’s trusted network of distribution partners located across the US. *Covers up to two non-warranty drone replacements within the standard two-year Always On service period.