HIC Services is in the business of solving and preventing clients’ problems and produce a superior Dense Medium Cyclone (DMC) that is designed and manufactured to individual orders, ensuring that every cyclone is ‘fit for purpose’ prior to manufacture. Our process evaluates the operating conditions of the plant in which the cyclone will be installed. This evaluation provides the required data which is then analysed through a dynamic processing model. This determines the critical internal dimensions that are required for that particular DM Cyclone design. With our accurate HIC designs, we ensure optimum separation and efficiency is obtained once the DM Cyclone is in operation and furthermore, ensuring installation is trouble free. DMC’s are manufactured to the highest quality standards and specifications, making them far superior to any other product in the market. HIC Services offer complete cyclone management in addition to sale of the DM Cyclone, which delivers exceptional customer satisfaction and value. Facilitated by their experienced and reliable onsite service division, HIC Services will take control of your whole project, from the conception and evaluation stage, through to the manufacture, delivery, installation, maintenance and ongoing after sales service/support. HIC Services also offer dynamic processing monitoring of Dense Medium Cyclone performance, through a partnership with Elsa Consulting Group, using pre-existing instrumentation facilities. Our DMC’s offer Interchangeable parts for increased lifespan Scrolled Evolute with Tangential and Involute inlet options. HIC Services include high capacity options with optimum separation and maximum efficiency under extreme pressure.  The patented surface boasts reduced wear and turbulence. HIC Services develop and feature complete Dynamic Process Monitoring in their DMC’s, and offer full Custom Design Capabilities specifically for your requirements. HIC Services DMC’s are integral across all sectors such as Coal, Iron ore, Chrome, Diamonds, Lead / Ash, Cobalt and Manganese.