The Maptek BlastLogic OData Service is a value-adding subscription resource which addresses three fundamental customer requirements: Custom reporting, Benchmark reporting across multiple mines and Interfacing data from BlastLogic to third-party clients. OData delivers a flexible way for customers to access and distribute their data stored in the BlastLogic Server to authorised non-BlastLogic users within their business. OData underpins BlastLogic as a mine operational tool to track, report and analyse the design, implementation and blast performance metrics. Value-in use decisions can now be considered by a broader audience to advance improvements in blast design and process. Importantly, the OData Service eliminates any inconsistencies or discrepancies in metrics reported, as the calculations and data used are derived from the BlastLogic single source of truth. Custom reporting A common request by BlastLogic users, especially engineers and planners, is the need to support custom reporting. Mines have in place many and varied reporting requirements for regulatory compliance, blast approval and tracking status of drillholes in the field, to name a few. The BlastLogic OData Service provides direct feeds of data to clients such as MS Excel 2010 / 2013 Power Query and MS Excel 2016 Data > Get & Transform. Engineers and planners are generally very knowledgeable Excel users. Now they can adapt their current templates, or create new ones that are auto-populated with data direct from BlastLogic. This promises to save many hours which are currently spent transforming and formatting data for weekly and monthly blast reports. Maptek also offers consulting assistance with report creation. In the graphs below, a customer has used OData to digitise reporting of hole status for management and supervisors. A monthly drilling report compares each rig and cumulative metres drilled. Benchmark reporting Benchmark reporting allows individual sites to compare trends and watch for nuances. It is also particularly powerful for BlastLogic customers who operate multiple sites. One large corporation has developed compliance to design reports as a mechanism to track performance over time. Primarily used as a lead indicator, these reports also allow management to monitor the rate of improvement, and address gaps to drive more consistent and sustained alignment to blast design. Improvements in design can be targeted with confidence and measured against downstream processes. Examples of benchmark reporting shown below provide insight into how reports can be structured using MS Power BI. Interfacing data Many customers want to interface data from BlastLogic to other applications or Business Intelligence reporting systems like TIBCO Spotfire and SAP Business Objects. The BlastLogic OData Service can be used by system integrators, architects, and developers for integration projects. It supports integration with Microsoft SQL Server Integration Services, Software AG webMethods or any Client or Agent capable of consuming JSON over HTTP. One example is to connect BlastLogic explosive inventory management data used by engineers and planners, to SAP which is used by procurement teams to monitor and trigger the ordering of stock. A second example is to integrate drillhole status like Design, Drilled, Charged, Fired with the mine system used to track and control reconciliation of short-term plans. OData feeds 17specific OData Feeds are currently available to cover many data elements. Considering the ever-growing amount of data, OData Feeds are filterable at the server before results are returned, or after the results are published to the Client. Additional data elements can be incorporated to support specific operational reporting requirements. The BlastLogic OData Service performs calculations and coding to transform raw data into useful information for analysing performance. It is therefore the only mechanism that Maptek supports to interface data from the BlastLogic Server with third-party applications and platforms. Maptek’s mine operations solutions target value-in-use decisions by instantly connecting and visualising operational processes. In this way, Maptek fosters efficient, optimised blasting that maximises resource value.