Accruent, the world’s leading provider of physical resource management solutions, has announced major enhancements to Meridian, Accruent’s innovative Asset Lifecycle Information Management (ALIM) software used by over 1,200 companies. These new products mark the first upgrades to Meridian since it was added to Accruent’s portfolio through the BlueCielo acquisition in November 2017. These enhancements include new cloud and analytics products, an enhanced mobile interface and major updates across existing Meridian client and server applications. The improved product line will provide organizations in asset-intensive and highly regulated industries even greater real-time accessibility to their mission-critical asset information. “As we’ve moved from working with 1,200 BlueCielo customers into Accruent’s world of over 7,000 global customers, there’s a growing demand for the maximum reliability and global availability of a cloud-based solution for managing engineering information throughout the asset lifecycle,” said Willem-Jan Scholten, Accruent’s SVP of International Sales. “The Meridian development team and our beta customers are delighted by the way Accruent’s scale and expertise have helped accelerate the timing and expanded the scope of these enhancements.” The new product announcements include: Meridian Cloud Meridian Cloud is the world’s first complete ALIM solution in the cloud. This secure cloud service for engineering information management, built on Microsoft Azure, ensures that users are informed, aligned, compliant and in control throughout asset lifecycles. Offered through a subscription-based model, Meridian Cloud reduces startup costs, simplifies procurement and operational budgeting, and enables costs to stay in line with changing requirements and actual software usage. “Meridian Cloud will allow us to take advantage of built-in industry best practices for asset information data management, with workflows ‘preconfigured’ within the software,” said Christopher Bornstein, Kaneka Global Asset Information Management Systems Coordinator. “This service will simplify and accelerate our implementation of asset lifecycle information management at new sites around the world.” Meridian Analytics Meridian Analytics is a new service for providing insights into engineering data captured within the Meridian platform. Its quality analytics provide visibility into the metadata on documents and information managed within Meridian. This service enables customers to quickly and effectively analyze and understand their data quality and integrity and plan for improvement. “We already rely on Meridian to manage our critical asset information for nine plant locations worldwide, and are working to roll out to an additional seven plants by the end of 2018,” said Bill Eager, Drawing Management Engineer at AbbVie. “The new Meridian Analytics offers extended visibility into all of our existing asset information. With this new service, we’ll gain far-reaching insights into our data and ensure that our users get the right information every single time, which will have a tremendous positive impact.” Product updates include: Meridian Server Meridian Server, the on-premise platform, has been upgraded to provide new consolidated capabilities including support for advanced information types, workflow auditing, performance enhancements for very large datasets and Enterprise Asset Management (EAM) integrations. Meridian clients