Weir Minerals has announced the global launch of the second-generation Warman® WGR® pump for the sand and aggregate market. The replaceable impeller and liners are manufactured using Linatex® premium rubber, proven to deliver the best wear performance and lengthen maintenance intervals for wet sand applications. Furthermore, the streamlined slurry flow path reduces recirculation and energy consumption making this the ideal choice for sand and aggregate sites. “Sand can be extremely abrasive and often rapidly wears down a slurry pump, which is why we have lined the WGR pump with Linatex rubber. The properties in our Linatex rubber protect the WGR pump from abrasive materials and extend its wear life. Linatex rubber is a proven performer in sand and aggregate applications around the world; there is no equal in terms of performance and wear resistance,” states Mark Doyle, Global Product Manager for Linatex® Rubber. Linatex® is made in a unique liquid phase manufacturing method providing it with exceptional wear properties that allow it to last longer in service, lower operators total ownership costs, and simplify change-outs.  The Linatex® wet end components are precision moulded to ensure they fit and are designed specifically for the Warman® WGR® pump. Weir Minerals has made significant enhancements to the original Warman® WGR® pump and specifically designed and engineered it for sand and aggregate applications. Compared to its predecessor, the 2nd generation pump offers several innovative features including improved hydraulic design, enhanced gland options, simplified wet-end and added features for improved safety and reduced maintenance. “We’ve listened to what our customers need and innovated our WGR pump to work harder. We have improved the hydraulic performance by streamlining the slurry flow path, which reduces recirculation and energy consumption. We have also simplified the wet-end, added a drainage plug for ease of maintenance, and can now offer gland seal options for customers,” states Marcus Lane, Global Product Manager for Centrifugal Pumps. The large-diameter expeller seal design prevents slurry leakage and protects against high inlet pressures, reducing maintenance and adjustment frequency. Additional gland seal options are also available including a remote adjusting patented D-Gland seal, which provides parallel adjustment of the sealing faces. “Gland seal water is typically unavailable to operators in sand and aggregate applications, which is why we built the dry gland seal arrangement into the pump. We have engineered it with our customers in mind, ensuring they can successfully pump their slurry without additional gland sealing water and without risk of leakage,” states Marcus Lane. The second-generation Warman® WGR® pump, combined with Linatex® premium rubber is backed by Weir Minerals’ service to deliver outstanding performance and results. Weir Minerals is a leading specialist in providing high-quality solutions to the sand and aggregate market to help customers run their sites to maximum capacity. This pump was initially launched for the European market in October last year but is now available globally. Contact your local Weir Minerals representative for more details.