As part of this agreement, ANDRITZ will supply proven separation and dewatering technologies, thus enabling Weir Minerals to offer complete tailings solutions to its customers. “The tailings market is experiencing growth driven by environmental and governmental pressures. We understand our customers are under increased pressure to further improve the management of their mine tailings, which is why we have partnered with ANDRITZ,” states Ricardo Garib, Weir Minerals Divisional President. “Our separation technologies have been proven in a large number of industries, such as food and beverage production, chemicals, biomass, organic waste, and mining. We are very proud to work with Weir Minerals, who operate in over 70 countries worldwide and in the most remote locations, and to contribute to their offering of sustainable and value-added tailings solutions with our expertise and product know-how,” says Olaf Müller, business area manager of ANDRITZ Separation. For a number of decades, Weir Minerals have been providing mines around the world with sustainable and cost-effective solutions for the management, disposal, and recycling of mine waste. The renowned GEHO® positive displacement pumps transport ores, minerals, and tailings under extreme conditions while minimising both water and energy consumption at the same time. In 2016, Weir Minerals opened the Weir Technical Centre, which has enhanced the company’s global tailings offering by developing and testing pipeline and tailings solutions, as well as manufacturing specific tailings-based products. Weir Minerals take the lead in providing reliable tailings solutions that ensure the health and safety of everyone on site and in the communities where they operate, as well as minimising any impact on the environment. Ricardo Garib adds: “This latest agreement complements our overall tailings offering and enables us to provide our customers with a complete tailings solution. Under the brand name IsoDry, we will now offer customers a range of mechanical separation technologies, such as thickeners, filter presses, centrifuges, and vacuum belt filters.” Why dry tailings? Dry stack deposition removes harmful waste by-products to create a compacted dry cake that can be disposed of safely. The process is safer than alternative solutions and better for the environment, allowing for improved recovery of process chemicals and giving back clean water. Weir Minerals take their solutions offering one step further by providing sustainable management that sees tailings converted into effective products, reducing costs, as well as risks, for operators. “Dry stacking of tailings is achieved by using a combination of belt, drum, stacked pressure plates, and vacuum filtration systems. We are thrilled that we can now offer this option to our customers and optimise the performance and efficiency of their tailings process. Our unique ability to specify the manufacture and transport of backfill products from tailings and the recovery of water from tailings slurries can significantly help our customers reduce costs and risks. Our tailings product offering with world-renowned performance combined with our global service footprint will ensure that our customers receive high-quality tailings solutions,” Ricardo Garib concludes.