Everyone is looking for ways to make their operation more productive, profitable and efficient. While examining the mining process is often a good place to start, it’s important to remember that what happens after the minerals and materials are extracted is equally important. Reducing the number of fines generated by your operation leads to more useable product and increased revenue. In short, choosing the right crushing equipment can make a huge difference for your bottom line. Sizers and double roll crushers are excellent for choice mines concerned with fines generation.  Depending on the application, fines are waste and can seriously impact your mine’s production. The definition of what ‘fine’ material is completely process-dependent.  Some kilns will incinerate limestone feed with an effective diameter less than 25mm or even as large as 40mm.  Where a coal mine may classify fine material having less than 4mm effective diameter. Either way, fines result in lost production and mines need to determine the value of this loss when making a decision on what type of crusher to use.  In a hard or abrasive application, a jaw or cone crusher will typically have a lower operating cost than a sizer.  But if the production loss due to fines is significant, the sizer can have the lowest total cost of ownership. Komatsu has expanded its crushing product offerings for mines to include feeder breakers, sizers and of course—double roll crushers. The company has seen significant growth in its sizer and double roll crusher product lines, which are typically used by customers who want higher production capabilities in a compact package that allows them to minimize fines generation. Initially developed for coal processing, mines are recognizing their versatility and applying them in a wider range of applications.  Most crushers are standard products, but the nature of sizers and double roll crushers allows Komatsu to readily develop a customized machine to meet the customer’s particular needs. Komatsu offers primary sizers in either dual or single drive configuration. These sizers utilize pick technology shared with the Komatsu feeder breaker, shearer, and continuous miner product lines. Picks are designed to allow rapid replacement minimizing the labour and downtime required. Primary sizers are designed to handle run of mine material and crush to a size that allows it to be conveyed on a belt.  The MVT-II line of secondary and tertiary sizers can further reduce the mineral size. The MVT-II can be configured to different product sizes, between 25mm and 100mm is typical. Crushing to smaller product sizes requires bolt-on wear castings. These are available in different alloys and tooth configurations, based on product size, abrasiveness and hardness of the mineral being crushed. Mines dealing with sticky materials or combinations of different types of minerals also employ sizers and double roll crushers. Primary sizers will use cleaners to comb between the teeth. Secondary and tertiary sizers have a higher number of smaller teeth. The rolls are timed and the teeth mesh together similar to gears, cleaning the rolls by displacing the sticky material. The next time your operation is searching for ways to increase revenue, consider the advantages of sizers and double roll crushers, your bottom line might thank you.