 Miner Elastomer Products Corporation (MEPC) will be showcasing our energy-absorbing mining products during the 2018 SME Annual Conference & Expo and the 91st Annual Meeting of the SME-MN Section from 25 to 28 February in Minneapolis, Minnesota, US. Our unique TecsPak® products will be on display at booth #2530. These products include mining suspensions, shovel components for mining shovels and wheel chocks for various vehicles used in the mining industry. We are very excited for this show this year because MEPC will be unveiling our new Dual Ride Suspension model and we will be offering two great promotions for anyone that visits our booth. Our first promotion during this show will be our brand new ‘first-time buyer’s programme’. This new programme will allow mining companies to use our suspensions on ‘consignment’ for 90 days. We will even ship the suspensions to the mine for you! With this new programme in place, mines all over the world will be able to experience how efficient these suspensions really are. Our TecsPak® rear suspensions have been installed on numerous mining trucks since the 90’s and are helping mines become more efficient by reducing maintenance time and costs. Our suspensions use our proprietary TecsPak® material and don’t require any gas or oil to maintain the suspension. These suspensions have also been successful specifically on water trucks for a lot of mines. Also, be sure to see our new suspension model that is one of a kind. This model looks exactly like the rear suspensions that are installed on mining trucks with payloads from 75t all the way to 240t. MEPC is also excited to announce that we will be offering a 10% discount on our virtually indestructible wheel chocks to any customer ordering wheel chocks during the show. Our chocks were specially designed for haul and services trucks used in the mining industry. This promotion gives customers the opportunity to test our wheel chocks on their fleet of trucks. Which will allow you to see our wheel chocks durability and dependability in action.