Schneider Electric, the global specialist in energy management and automation, today announced a new partnership agreement with Cylance, the company that revolutionized the antivirus and endpoint protection industry with true AI-powered prevention that blocks malware, fileless attacks and today’s most advanced cyber threats. Schneider Electric Software will work closely with Cylance to enable heightened levels of security for customers leveraging the Industrial Software Platform for Engineering, Planning and Operations, Asset Performance and Monitoring and Control across their industrial and infrastructure operations. As operations grow increasingly digital, the need to provide safeguards against cybersecurity threats becomes critical. Greater investment is needed to maintain the needed level of security to protect assets, processes and safety of operations. This begins with how software is implemented. This agreement involves placing Cylance’s security capabilities within the Industrial Software Platform. Artificial Intelligence and machine learning are two technologies driving innovation across industrial and infrastructure operations. These technologies can now be applied to pattern recognition applications to deliver a best-in-class solution for cybersecurity protection. Schneider Electric Software product development vice-president Andrew McCloskey said: “We take security seriously and so we have invested considerable time and effort in identifying how to deliver ever-increasing security standards for our software solutions. “This partnership enables us to stay at the forefront of protection against cyber-attacks, which will then be shared with our partners to minimize the potential for a security compromise by our customers.” “We are pleased to have been chosen by Schneider Electric, a recognized leader in software development and CMMI Level 5 certified solution provider,” said Daniel Doimo, President and COO at Cylance. “Not only can we help drive greater security standards for Schneider Electric customers, but together we can help drive security innovation and prevent cyber-attacks from occurring, rather than reacting to breaches after they’ve already caused damage.” Select early adopter Schneider Electric Software customers have already participated in beta deployments, which have delivered well-received results, validating the technological feasibility of the partnership.