By 2030, aluminium demand from electric vehicles (EVs) will near ten million tonnes, a ten-fold increase from 2017.  The usage of primary aluminium intensive, extrusions and rolled products will be significantly higher than we see in internal combustion engine vehicles today. Counter to that, scrap intensive secondary castings usage will fall as the shift to full battery electric vehicles occurs. In the coming years, EVs will support primary aluminium demand and impose a limit on scrap demand. 40 million EVs by 2030 and ten million tonnes of aluminium demand CRU forecasts global battery electric (BEV), plug-in hybrid electric (PHEV) and hybrid electric (HEV) sales to increase to 42 million vehicles by 2030. From a share of 4% in 2017, we expect electric vehicles to account for approximately 30% of the global vehicle fleet by 2030. A ‘greening’of global power and now, increasingly, transport markets has begun: sales of New Energy Vehicles (NEVs), for example, grew by more than 40% year on year globally in 2016. These global trends will have potentially decisive impacts on aluminium markets. CRU has developed a comprehensive forecasting and scenario evaluation tool with which to understand these impacts and the policy, technological, macroeconomic and societal factors which shape them. This model incorporates a consistent macroeconomic framework, and considers developments in technology and power markets. Bottom-up analysis of EV components In this piece, we provide a summary of the key findings for aluminium demand from EVs. We estimated aluminium intensity through discussions with car makers, tier 1 and tier 2 automotive suppliers and information from automotive fairs. We complimented this research with desk based research of investor material and conference presentation from key industry players. Aluminium usage to rise by 15-27% in electric vehicles Plug-in hybrid and full battery electric vehicles use 25-27% more aluminium than the typical internal combustion engine car today. This assumes 160kg of aluminium per vehicle as a base line for aluminium content in internal combustion engines. New EV applications will be as important as auto body sheet Increases in aluminium usage in Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) cars is in great part because of the light weighting benefits of aluminium. This was clearly the driver for Ford’s F-150 switch to aluminium and underlies much of the move from steel to aluminium bodied cars. However, for EVs the increase in aluminium usage has as much to do with new applications, as increased adoption of aluminium body sheet.