 Every year in autumn, the state-run University of Perm in Russia hosts a technical conference for mining experts. Both professors and scientists from the university and representatives from the industry contribute to the event. In 2017, CASAR provided an interesting presentation on transport cables used in underground mining. As a qualified expert in mining cables, Dr. Oliver Fries (VP European Engineering) presented the success story of the CASAR transport cables. The head of the Casar sales office in Moscow, Svetlana Skvirskaya, provided energetic support in both organisation and translation. This special cable for mining, now in use around the world, has made its way to Eastern Europe and particularly to Russia, and its performance in terms of life-span and reliability have convinced numerous customers of its merits. For example, the experimental results from a mine belonging to OJSC URALKALI was presented in detail. One of the most important services offered by CASAR engineers is to adapt or optimise existing or future rope constructions to the given site conditions based on the equipment type, geometry and load. In doing so, the main aim is always to ensure the longest possible life-span, because every day lost without material transported significantly compromises the economic viability of the mine. To secure the planned rope lifespan, CASAR engineers calculate the respective flex cycles in advance, which can then be guaranteed to the mine. For the shaft in question, the mining rope Turboplast M with a diameter of 63mm and a length of 728m was selected. The tried and tested rope construction of galvanised wires in Langs’ Lay, and the proven plastic-coated steel core achieves a minimum breaking strength of 350t. The single-layer double drum with a diameter of 5m lifts a load to a height of 480m in around 11m/s. After 244,000 cycles, the rope was removed, and the areas exposed to the greatest stress during operation in the mine were examined in the lab. Neither the loss of profile nor the wear and corrosion on the inner side of the rope were significant as yet. The breaking strength measured was, despite the high number of load cycles, still above the minimum breaking strength guaranteed at delivery. The presentation and the information gleaned was well-received by the experts present. An invitation to the conference in 2018 has already been announced.