A high-grade gold deposit in Western Australia relies on Maptek Evolution Cloud-based technology to solve scheduling challenges. The Enterprise deposit is located 68km northwest of Kalgoorlie within the Ora Banda district on the eastern limb of the Kurrawang Syncline. The Kurrawang Syncline is a major regional fold structure in the Norseman-Wiluna Greenstone Belt of the Eastern Gold Historically mined by open cut methods to 100m, Enterprise is a large high-grade deposit and an important component of the Norton Gold Fields production plans in the next five years. Scheduling challenge The technical services department wanted an optimal scheduling solution for the open pit operations that would allow them to work directly with Multiple Indicator Kriging (MIK) block models and non-MIK block models in the same multi-mine schedule scenario. This would reduce the amount of data manipulation required and mitigate mine planning risks. Moreover, the cost associated with waste material was an important factor. In addition, the encapsulation required to isolate the acid-reactive material had to be considered. Norton Gold Fields has acquired Maptek Evolution software to help address these challenges. At a strategic level, alternative scenarios generated in Evolution will be evaluated from a cutoff grade optimisation point of view, with particular emphasis on the haulage component. The productivity rate for each hydraulic excavator model is associated within the block model for each material type. This provides full flexibility for the mine planning team to evaluate multiple alternatives in a short time using cloud-based technology. Waste dump encapsulation is one aspect that requires special attention from an environmental viewpoint. Encapsulation needs to be controlled during the scheduling process. Information is imported into Evolution to allow simulation of different mine schedule scenarios, ensuring that this important variable cannot be ignored and is managed efficiently. The graphical interface provides the visual link for communicating the mining implications of different scenarios with various stakeholders, improving understanding and subsequent actions. Every piece of data is populated back into the block model, allowing information to be managed and shared across different departments for incorporation in the short-term mine planning process. Evolution has given the mine planning team at Norton Gold Fields all of the tools and options required to evaluate and add value to the Enterprise project. Thanks to
Flavio Magalhaes, Technical Services Superintendent
Morteza Abyazani, Planning Engineer
Norton Gold Fields (subsidiary of Zijin Mining Group)