        South African miners are poised for a reinvigorated industry with the election of new President, Cyril Ramaphosa. Upon entering office, Ramaphosa began talks to resolve the impasse over the revised Mining Charter and it looks like progress is already being made. With a background in both business and politics, experts are optimistic about what lies ahead and here we assess the prospects for South Africa’s mining industry under new leadership. On the opposite end of the scale, more than 10,000 workers in Ukraine are again on strike due to missing wages. Secretive operations and millions in arrears are fuelling fears for the sustainability of the country’s 150 mines. We investigate if the troubles could permanently affect coal mining in Ukraine. Meanwhile, global commodity prices are booming but can this situation last? With firms resisting repeating past mistakes, we explore what companies are doing differently to make the most of the current boom and also build a sustainable financial future. Plus, we speak to consultancy firm Brand Finance about the growing importance of brand identity in the mining industry and what makes a winning campaign, and in technology, we get to grips with blockchain to learn what the digital ledger system can offer to improve mining supply chains, and find out why BHP is using military-grade drones to survey its Queensland, Australia mine sites. Click here to read the latest energy industry news and analysis, and join the conversation on Twitter. High hopes for South African mining
South Africa’s new President, Cyril Ramaphosa, has begun talks to resolve the country’s current impasse over the Mining Charter, and both mining experts and the public have expressed optimism for the new. MINE looks into the prospects for South Africa’s mining industry under new, business-savvy leadership.
Click here to read Strikes, debts and imports: What lies ahead for mining in  Ukraine?
Coal miners in Ukraine are once again on strike, as 10,000 state-owned workers are protesting lack of wages in 2018. The company has arrears of €25.8 million and fears are growing for the future of the mines and the workers they support. Could this permanently affect coal mining in Ukraine?
Click here to read What makes a strong mining brand?
BHP has been named the world’s most valuable mining brand by Brand Finance. The company’s ‘Think Big’ rebrand campaign reminded people of BHP’s role in Australia’s development and is the main reason for the accolade. We speak to Brand Finance about how to build a strong, winning mining brand today.
Click here to read Capitalising on the commodities boom
The mining cycle has hit a sweet spot, with booming commodity prices, lower costs and strong global growth fuelling healthy bottom lines. Can it last? Miners are eager to exploit the trend without repeating mistakes of the past. We look at how to make the most of the current boom, and build a sustainable financial future?
Click here to read Blockchain: the path the supply chain transparency?
Blockchain digital ledger systems has a number of applications in the mining industry. One of the major benefits it could bring to miners is monitoring minerals and ores in the supply chain, which could boost corporate responsibility in this sensitive area. How would it work? MINE investigates.
Click here to read How drones are changing the art of mineral surveying
BHP has been trialling drones fitted with military-grade cameras to provide real-time aerial footage and 3D maps of our sites. Far cheaper than using planes for survey work, the company has revealed savings at of A$5 million at the Queensland sites alone each year. So what makes them so ideal for the job of surveying specifically?
Click here to read In the regions, interest in Russia’s frozen north is hotting up but the few have cracked the surface of this inhospitable region. Now, companies including Rio Tinto have begun expanding their exploration efforts, and we find out what challenges lay before them and what can they expect to encounter. Also easing access is Zimbabwe, aided by the appointment of new President Emmerson Mnangagwa. Does the recent deal for a $4.2bn platinum mine develop signal an invitation for greater foreign investment? We take a look. With the gemstone sector about to take off due to growing interest in diamond alternatives, we locate the discovery hotspots and excavations sites around the world. Also, we find out how Anglo American intends to fulfill its admirable yet ambitious new sustainability strategy goals, and look into the implications of Michelin Group’s plans to acquire UK-based conveyor belt maker, Fenner, as the the former sets its sights on the mining materials market. And we speak to geologist Susan Lomas about her founding of the #MeTooMining Association and why the modern industry needs this vital movement to tackle sexual misconduct. With the launch of our fantastic new website you can now read MINE Magazine for free across all devices, including mobile. It is still free to read and you can sign up for a subscription to get all the latest news, analysis and insight on the global energy industry delivered straight to your phone. You can also browse our archive to read back issues in our web viewer, available on desktop and on iPad.
                                    
									
									jQuery( document ).ready(function() {
										/* Companies carousel */
										jQuery('.carousel').slick({
										  dots: true,
										  infinite: true,
										  speed: 300,
										  lazyLoad: 'ondemand',
										  slidesToShow: 1,
										  slidesToScroll: 1,
										  adaptiveHeight: true
										});
									});