Weir Minerals announced the expansion of its extensive dewatering solutions portfolio with the global launch of the Multiflo® RF dewatering pump unit.  The new Multiflo® RF range sets the benchmark for dewatering pump units, expertly engineered in a compact package, offering customers a light and flexible solution. Weir Minerals Dewatering product manager Peter Smit explains: “We developed the Multiflo RF unit following specific customer requests for a more compact dewatering pump that could move around site with ease while still retaining the same performance, reliability and robust build of our other units. The key to the compact design is the use of close coupled pumps, which provide the added benefit of accurate pump alignment. We also designed the Multiflo RF pump with built-in skid runners and a bolt-on dozer push-bar option to offer our customers versatility of operating configurations.” With a global reputation as a premium supplier of dewatering solutions, built over 40 years, Weir Minerals has moved to the next stage in the evolution of its dewatering pumps. The new diesel driven Multiflo® RF pump presents a unit that incorporates the convenience of an auto vacuum priming system with an inbuilt skid and a compact design.  The range has been developed to operate effectively in a variety of harsh environments and applications, such as mining, quarrying, and water transfer.  The small frame footprint allows for ease of movement around site, while the dirty water capability sets the pump above the competition. The Multiflo® RF range includes seven new units, each designed to maximise efficiency no matter the application, with the same world class Weir Minerals aftersales service and support our customers expect.  The unit provides a wide range of standard inclusions and a comprehensive selection of optional features to suit customers’ dewatering needs. Weir Minerals Dewatering global product manager Daniel Bacigalupo adds: “The Multiflo RF range is the next generation of dewatering pump units, and demonstrates our renowned attention to detail and focus on delivering a product that is powerful and efficient.  Weir Minerals’ dewatering portfolio covers a variety of dewatering solutions for our customers, and the new Multiflo RF units complement our overall dewatering offering.” Weir Minerals offers an extensive range of mine and process dewatering products, including dewatering pumps, hydrocyclones, dewatering screens, specialty hose, tailored pontoons and barges. The team of dewatering experts provide operators with a wide range of solutions for their dewatering system in applications all over the world, drawing on their extensive engineering and application expertise.