Hillhead 2018 will see Sandvik Mining and Rock Technology Mobile Crushers and Screens highlight the total solutions nature of its world-leading equipment ranges. This year will see the launch of new products and services, new digital solutions, as well as live demonstrations in front of the stand. The Sandvik range of mobile crushing and screening equipment provides solutions for virtually any application, and encompasses such diverse businesses areas as surface rock quarrying, excavation, demolition, recycling and civil engineering. The all-encompassing range has provided customers across the world with the very latest developments whether working independently, or in conjunction with other equipment from Sandvik’s offering. As well as mobile crushing and screening equipment, Sandvik Mining and Rock Technology produces ranges of underground excavation and mining equipment, rock tools, drilling rigs, breakers, tunnelling equipment, stationary crushing and screening machinery and bulk-materials handling systems. Equipment purpose developed to deal with virtually any mining, quarrying or construction application. The very latest at Hillhead 2018 As the world’s leading ‘live-action’ show, Hillhead 2018 will see Sandvik highlight the total solutions nature of its mobile screening and crushing offering. A number of global product launches are planned, with demonstrations of mobile crushing and screening equipment being held in front of the stand. Other exciting developments will be demonstrated on the stand itself. Products being shown include: What makes Hillhead exciting and different, are the live equipment demonstrations at the quarry face. This year Sandvik will be demonstrating the following mobile crushers and screens: Virtual reality experience and digitalisation In order to provide visitors to the stand with an insight into what makes the new QH332 with double-deck hanging screen such a major development in cone crushing, the very latest digital technology will be used to showcase its innovative features. This will take the form of a ‘virtual reality’ presentation and walk through. Continuing this theme, Sandvik will also show how it has used the very latest technology to help its customers get the very best from their investment, with the launch of Sandvik My Fleet. This is a fleet management tool which provides critical data on GPS location and machine utilization. The remote monitoring system enables customers to optimize their machine operation and work more efficiently through accessing a functional portal interface. With live demonstrations of some of the most important pieces of Sandvik equipment being held regularly throughout the day, a focus on providing solutions for our customers, and virtual reality tours, Hillhead will certainly be a showcase event for Sandvik Mining and Rock Technology in 2018. The Sandvik stand will be located at Stand J1. We look forward to seeing you in Buxton! Hillhead takes place from 26 to 28 June 2018 and is held in Buxton, Derbyshire.